JEREMY: Let's talk
about data types.
A type is a set of values that
are related, a family of values
that belong together.
So far we've seen the Bool
data type, which consists
of values True and False.
We've also used
the Int data type,
which consists of
whole number values
from some minimum
to some maximum.
These bounds may differ
based on whether your OS is
32-bit or 64-bit.
What else have we looked at?
Characters, lists.
Oh, yes, and pairs as well.
We've also looked at
function types that describe
argument and return values.
Now, we want to think
about user-defined types,
creating custom data
types for our own program.
First, we'll consider
a simple type
that consists of a finite
set of alternative values.
Apparently, in
the Amazon jungle,
there is a tribe who
count one, two, many.
That is, they have
no distinct words
for larger integers than two.
We could represent
this type in Haskell
as follows-- data SimpleNum
equals One or Two or Many.
If you have GHCi
open, why not type
this in your interactive
session right away?
The key word "data" indicates
we are defining a new type.
The name of the type and
the names of the values
should start with
capital letters.
The alternative values are
separated with a vertical bar
character.
Let's have a look at
some of these values.
One-- ah, we can't see it.
We need to be able
to print it out.
Add deriving Show to
the type definition.
Show is a type class.
We'll talk in more
detail about this later.
For now, let's just understand
that any type must derive Show
if we are to print
out its values.
Data SimpleNum equals One or
Two or Many deriving Show.
OK.
Great.
Now, let's write a function
to convert from int
to SimpleNum values.
First, I'm going to turn on
multi-line support in GHCi
so I can format my function
definition over several lines.
I use the set
command to do this.
OK.
Let's go for it.
Let convert 1 equal One,
convert 2 equal Two,
convert underscore equal Many.
So convert takes an int
input-- well, really
a value that has a type
belonging to the Num data
class-- again, more later--
and return a SimpleNum output.
Let's try this out.
Convert 1.
Convert 300.
OK.
Map convert 1 to 5.
Perfect.
Right.
That's a custom data type with
alternative values, otherwise
known as a Sum data type.
Now let's think about
a record data type that
stores a portfolio of values.
Hm.
How about cricket scores?
When a team bats in
cricket, you need
to know two integer values.
The first is the number of
runs scored by the team.
The second is the number of
players who are out, i.e.
have been eliminated.
So a good score for the
New Zealand cricket team
might be 350 for 4.
That's 350 runs scored for
the loss of four players.
We can represent this
as a Product data type.
Data CricketScore equals
Score Char list int, int,
deriving Show.
Score is a type constructor
that takes a string and two int
arguments and returns
a cricket score value.
In general, these kinds
of custom data types
are called algebraic data types.
The alternative values
relate to algebraic sums,
and the record values relate
to algebraic products.
I'll spare you the hairy
Type Theory for now.
But at least you know to
Google for algebraic data types
if you are keen to discover
more about type theory.
Let's conclude with what
we've learned in this session.
First, we use the "data" keyword
to define a new custom type.
Second, types must derive
the Show type class
if we want to see their
values printed out.
Third, we used vertical bars
to specify alternatives, or sum
data types.
And we used type constructors
to build record types
like score values in cricket,
which are product data types.
Thanks.
Goodbye.